Technical



Ball Control
Player's touch and manipulation of the ball

Dribbling
DRIBBLER Player's close control and ability to run with the ball. This refers to the player’s ability to run with the ball and manipulate it under close control. This is purely his proficiency with the ball at his feet – his Pace, Acceleration, Agility, and Balance will all aid his dribbling in different circumstances, and whilst a higher Dribbling attribute will also help him in different situations, Dribbling alone isn’t enough to get by.

First Touch MAGNET
The speed and efficiency with which the player brings the ball under control.

1 v 1 WIZARD
1 v 1: Ability to take on opponents and go past them with the ball.
Exemplars: Lionel Messi, Ronaldo, Stanley Matthews

Skills BALLER
Ability to dazzle opponents and spectators with freestyle skills.
Exemplars: Ronaldinho, Neymar, Cristiano Ronaldo, Yannick Bolasie, Douglas Costa

Technique MAESTRO
Player's ability to display their high level of technical competence.
Exemplars: 



Defending




Ball Winning STOPPER
Player's ability to proactively win the ball from the opposition, using techniques such as sliding tackles and stab tackles. (excludes 1 v 1s)

Marking
SHADOW
Player's ability to mark opponents, notably tracking runs and preventing time/space on the ball. 

1 v 1 BARRIER
Player's aptitude in 1 v 1 situations, as well as use of timing, jockeying and body position to prevent the opponent passing them. 

Positioning SENTINEL
Player's positioning of themselves in relation to the play, notably in defensive/goalkeeping situations and tactical formations. Positioning is the ability of a player to read a situation and position himself in the best possible position to deal with the unfolding events.

Pressing HARRIER
Player's ability to put pressure on the opposition while out of possession. 




Distribution


Aiming Passes CONNECTOR
Player's ability to aim their passes accurately, including their pass release time, pass weighting, pass placement  and pass accuracy.

Crossing CROSSER
Crossing: Player's threat from balls into the box from wide areas.

Range LONG PASSER
Passing Range: The player's ability to play long distance passes.

Selection DIRECTOR
Pass Selection: player's ability to pick the correct pass, as well as dictate the tempo and direction of the game. 

Technique MARVEL
Passing Technique: Player's mastery of advanced passing techniques, such as volleys, flicks, backheels, drives, layoffs and first time passes. 




Finishing


Aiming Shots FINISHER
Player's ability to find the target with their shots, includes instinctive knowledge of where the goal is, speed of shot release, shot accuracy and shot release time.

Heading HEADER
Heading: player's ability head the ball at goal

Range SNIPER
Shooting Range: Player's threat from outside the box

Shot Power CANNON
Shot Power: strength of player's efforts on goal 

Technique ASSASSIN
Shooting Technique: Player's mastery of advanced shooting techniques, such as volleys, flicks, chips, drives and first time finishes. 




Mental





Character


Competitiveness WINNER
The player's will to win and be the best

Consistency/Reliability STALWART
Consistency: A player's ability to maintain their performance levels, carry out the jobs required for their position and minimise mistakes

Creativity/Unpredictability LIVEWIRE
A player's ability and desire to fashion chances on goal, either for themselves or for their teammates.

Determination/Willpower DRIVER
Determination: strength of a player's resolve, will and motivation.

Temperament/Enjoyment ENTHUSIAST




Discipline



Aggression BRUTE
Player's desire to assert themselves and use force in their play, for example with a shoulder-to-shoulder charge or a strong sliding tackle. This reflects a player’s attitude in terms of playing mentality but is not necessarily a dirtiness indicator. A more aggressive player will look to involve himself in every incident and get stuck in, perhaps at the expense of a yellow card or two. A less aggressive player may shy away from situations and merely drop into his comfort zone, waiting for the play to find him.

Bravery ENFORCER
Bravery: player's willingness to put their body on the line for the team, for example in a 50-50 challenge, a risky header or a goalkeeper diving at the feet of an attacker to claim the ball. How committed and indeed, brave, a player is. Braver players will risk injury more in situations a more cautious player may shy away from. They’ll go in where it hurts and lay it on the line for the team.

Fairplay GENTLEMAN
Fairplay: player's willingness to play cleanly and within the rules.  

Leadership LEADER
Leadership: ability to inspire teammates, through both verbal and demonstrative means as well as their aura. 

Professionalism MODEL PRO
Professionalism: the extent to which the player honours their status as a professional footballer, measured by their on-pitch and off-pitch conduct, attitude towards training and public/social media persona.


Game-Reading



Perception



Anticipation HAWK
The player's ability to think ahead and read the game. How well a player can predict and react to an event.
Defensively: Franco Baresi (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=boPQNpPvJq0)
Offensively: Gerd Muller

Awareness/Sharpness CAT
Awareness: player's sharpness and alertness to danger both offensively and defensively, as well as their reaction speed to quick game state changes and opportunism. Also known as smelling the danger.

Composure/Poise METRONOME
Composure: player's ease and comfort on the ball. The player’s steadiness of mind and ability, particularly with the ball.  When faced with a big goalscoring chance or heavy pressure defensively, a player with high Composure will be able to keep his head and more often than not make an intelligent decision which is beneficial to the team.


Experience VETERAN
Experience: depth of player's first-hand knowledge and comprehension of the game.

Vision RADAR
Vision: player's ability to locate their teammates and read their movement. 

Strategy



Decisions ARBITER
Decisions: player's ability to make the correct choices when presented with several options. The ability of a player to make a correct choice a majority of the time. This attribute is important in every position but perhaps more so for central defenders and midfielders, who will see a lot of the ball and have a number of options when in possession.

Off The Ball Movement GHOST
Player's interpretation of space on the pitch and timing of runs. 



Spatial Awareness RAUMDEUTER
Article about Spatial Awareness
Spatial Awareness: As more and more we hear about creative players, small players being more dominant in the world of Football, stylish play, skillful players with vision and all of these things, I would like to highlight an important attribute people often miss out when speaking about them. SPATIAL AWARENESS.
For years I have coached Futsal and Football with the philosophy that I want to try and encourage players to make decisions and understand what is going on around them.
Futsal in particular is a game which creates this situation time and again and this is one of the main reasons I originally fell in love with the sport and believe it is the best possible way to develop young Footballers.
Things that Futsal encourage are some of the most important in Football and they include touches on the ball, skill, technique and body shape. It also includes things which people deem very important such as decision making and creative play which sets players apart. All of these things can be replicated in training drills and small sided football matches but in general I feel Futsal encourages these aspects more readily as it is a natural part of the game and it does not need specific coaching to do so. It simply creates an environment where these things are naturally absorbed and used.
The real thing that sets Futsal apart though has to be it’s development of spatial awareness.
What is spatial awareness some may ask?
Simply Spatial awareness is a well thought-out awareness of things in the space around us. It also deals with the awareness of our body’s position in space.
Studies have shown that deficiencies in spatial awareness can keep people back from maximizing their true potential.
Without possessing this ability it would be almost impossible for players to be able to have creativeness or to make the right decisions.
In Football terms, a player with great spatial awareness will generally be a player who plays with their head up and can see what is happening around them and has the ability to make decisions based on this.
For example, a lot of people speak of the great tournament Andrea Pirlo had for Italy at the Euro’s and how England lacked a player like him at the tournament. “Creative genius” some said, “great decision maker” some said.
The facts are all of these comments are true but without having spatial awareness, none of the attributes are possible.
Pirlo is one that stands out in recent times but we have been blessed over the years with players who also possess this ability such as Paul Scholes, Zinedine Zidane, Alessandro Del Piero, David Silva and Sergio Busquets.
You will notice that the players I have listed have varying ability. I believe that spatial awareness is what sets these players at a higher level than more skillful opponents.
My argument is that many players that are considered to be poor decision makers are in fact not poor decision makers, they are just incapable of knowing what options they do have around them. This lack of spatial awareness is what then forces what appears to be a wrong decision as when watching we can see all of the options available.
Players like Busquets, Pirlo and Scholes would not be considered the most skilful or athletic players and their creative play comes from their ability to know what is around them. Not directly through creative play through ball skill.
A way of explaining this would be to point out players such as Nani, Aaron Lennon or Adam Johnson in recent times who are players capable of creating things through pure skill, athleticism and decision making but lack the spatial awareness to be able to see the same things on a Football pitch that the above players can.
You could argue these three players have more pure footballing technique, skill and ability than a player like Pirlo, Scholes, Silva and the above but obviously the thing that stops them from being recognized as truly “creative players” is their lack of spatial awareness.
Knowing what is happening around you is one of the most important things in football and to teach it is difficult, Futsal is one of the few natural environments this can be learned.
Players need to have an environment to use their skills and develop decision making. If they can effectively be aware of what is around them, decisions become much easier to make.
Those with good spacial awareness will always appear to have time on the ball as they are smart and know where they need to take the ball to create space, they also will appear to have options whenever they receive the ball, this is the case purely due to their ability to think a step ahead due to once again having good spatial awareness of what is around them.
Ask many of today’s world stars and they all grew up in Futsal or similar forms of the game where they were encouraged at an early age to work in tight spaces and develop this ability naturally.
The nest time someone says a player has poor decision making, think about why the player makes these decisions? Is it that he is poor at making decisions or is it that he has poor spatial awareness? or is it a combination of both?



Teamwork TEAM PLAYER
Teamwork: player's willing to aid their team/teammates, through communication, offensive/defensive support and selflessness.

Versatility UTILITY MAN
Versatility: a player's ability to play in a number of positions. 

Physical





Fitness





Condition MACHINE
Player's current physical condition, taking mainly into account fatigue and age.

Endurance IRONMAN
AKA grit. Resistance to mental fatigue and hardship.


Energy ENGINE
Player's willingness to run 

Invulnerability SUPERHUMAN
Player's resistance to knocks and injuries

Stamina ATHLETE
Player's ability to maintain their physical performance levels 



Mobility





Acceleration ROCKET
How quickly a player can accumulate speed.

Agility ACROBAT
The speed and grace of a player's physical movements. Agility reflects how well a player can start, stop, and move in different directions at varying levels of speed (pace)


Balance COLUMN
Player's ability to stay on their feet and shift their weight effectively. Balance reflects simply how well a player can keep his balance in situations both with and without the ball. With the ball, it refers to how balanced he is running with it and evading opponents, without it, it refers to his balance when facing a player running at him, or his stability when turning/jumping.

Maneuverability WEAVER
Player's ability to turn and change direction, with and without the ball. 

Top Speed SPEEDSTER
Player's ability to cover distances quickly

Physicality Player's strength and aerial ability

Aerial Battles TARGET MAN
Player's ability to win contested balls in the air

Duels GLADIATOR
Player's ability to win physical battles with opponents, such as shoulder-to-shoulders, 1 v 1s and jostling at corners

Jumping FLIER
Player's ability to leap vertically and laterally

Lower Body Strength POWERHOUSE
Player's strength below the waist

Upper Body Strength TANK
Player's strength above the waisT




Set Pieces



Corners CORNER TAKER
Player's effectiveness from corners

Direct Free Kicks DFK TAKER
Player's effectiveness from direct freekicks

Indirect Free Kicks IFK TAKER
Player's effectiveness from indirect freekicks

Penalties PENALTY TAKER
Player's effectiveness from the penalty spot

Throwing CATAPULT
Player's ability to throw the ball (throw-ins and GK throws)




GK




Crosses PICKER
Goalkeeper's reading and claiming of crosses and high balls

Handling GLOVE
Goalkeeper's ability to catch, punch and parry the ball away from danger

1 v 1 SHIELD
Goalkeeper's effectiveness in one on one situations with an opponent, including penalties and freekicks.

Reflexes SHOTSTOPPER
Goalkeeper's shot stopping ability at short range or short notice

Rushing Out/Command of Area GUARDIAN
Goalkeeper's ability to leave their line and address danger in their box/outside their box